README_Jameson.md, before:

# Machine Learning with Formula 1 Driver Info Analysis
Using ETL, Unsupervised Machine Learning, and creating a visualization dashboard of data derived from Formula 1 Driver information to explore phenomenas within Formula 1.  

<br/>
<p align="center">Jameson Thornton, Varun Yalaka, John Allen, Maher Abdallah, Jacob Voyce, and Tyrone Fraley<br/>
UC Berkley Extension<br/>
Jan 20, 2023<br/>
<p/>

<br/>
<p align="center">
  <img width="460" height="200" src="Images/formulaonedatapoints.jpeg">
</p>
<br/>

## Project Overview

<br/>
Stretching back as far as 1946, (ESPN, N.D.); Formula One has been a single-seater racing phenomenon, with an average of 1.21 million viewers per race amongst ESPN, ESPN 2, and ABC platforms in 2021, (The Athletic Staff, 2022).Formula One leaves many fans at the edge of their seats. A whole world of viewers from all different countries, ethnical origins, and cultures united in a front to support the racing league and it's competitors. With such high stakes on the line for each driver/team including, but not limited to: technological racing enhancements rooted in prototypes, team sales growth, winning tournaments, and the safety of the drivers and the crew all on the line in an energy packed race to the finish. The average cost of a Formula One vehicle is "20.62 million", according to de Artola (N.D.).
Knowing this, one may ask themselves if data science could possibly answer questions that not only fans have, but the Formula One teams as well. Such questions  as how race outcomes could be predicted when observing the type of tire compounds vs. pit stops to change the tires, positioning on the starting line and how it could affect a driver's potential to win. Other questions regarding technological enhancements and how they contribute to a driver's capability to increase their performance and what it would look like if all drivers were compared against one another even if they have not faced each other? Questions surrounding the phenomenas might be able to be answered within the realms of Unsupervised Machine Learning. Six individuals from different professional backgrounds teamed up to possibly give the first step to answering quetions based by using historical data derived from Kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rohanrao/formula-1-world-championship-1950-2020) by figuring out if drivers could first be clustered using unsupervised learning. The team consists of Jameson Thornton, Varun Yalaka, John Allen, Maher Abdallah, Jacob Voyce, and Tyrone Fraley. The team will be using ETL practices through pandas and SQL to first extract and transform the table, store the tables in a SQL DB and AWS, then using pandas ML libraries through sklearn to develop unsuprvised machine learning models. Finally, the data would be visualized with matplot lib, Tableau, and HTML practices to deploy an interactive dashboard of driver data. 
 
 <br/>
 
## Collaboration and Assignment of Roles

<br/>
Initially, the team met to observe the raw data and draw possible project outlines to better explore, assess, and visualize the phenomenas presented by Formula One data. Understanding that the initial meeting was crucial to develop a project outline/scope of practice, the team created a vision for the project, team expectations, and overall best practices were established to ensure project deadlines and integrity could be viable. During the data exploration phase, fourteen csv files were compiled into a data frame amassing a total of 1554 rows to meet saturation for the machine learning model. According to Faulkner, 2017, "Saturation means that a researcher can be reasonably assured that further data collection would yield similar results and serve to confirm emerging themes and conclusions." Amongst the realms of unsupervised machine learning reaching saturation is important. At times when working with machine learning models, one may start out with 1,000 data points and it may go the right direction; however, at times 1,000,000 data points may not be sufficient for the model (Dr. Steeger, N.D.). To call functions and pull data for the analysis the team agreed on a Formula One API (https://theoehrly.github.io/Fast-F1/index.html). The next step in the collaboration process was to design an outline of the project, time lines, roles, and deliverables. The outline of the project would include ETL, assign databases using PostgreSQL and AWS, develope an unsupervised machine learning model (K-means clustring), and finally create visualizations using Tableau. The team assignments are listed below; however, at times each team member would volunteer to assist in all roles they were not assigned in an effort to meet project deadlines.

* Project Roles:
    * ETL: Jacob Voyce and Jameson Thornton
    * Database: John Allen
    * Unsupervised Machine Learning: Varun Yalaka and Maher Abdhallah
    * Visualization: Tyrone Fraley, Jacob Voyce, and John Allen
    * Project Manager: John Allen
    * Technical Written Report: Tyrone Fraley 

## ETL


some key learnings:
 - having a subject matter expert who can gut check the data is extremely important. Blindly plugging in data into a machine learning model might get results, but they may not make any sense. 
 - joining multiple data tables can cause data loss if some tables are very limited in their shared attributes and using a restrictive join (INNER, or LEFT). 
 - a machine learning clustering model will assign a class to each record/row of data; so in our model if we want to classify drivers, but each driver has many races or laps we may need to aggregate these records into a singular record for each driver where the features represent the results (such as count of wins, or count of finishing positions, etc.)





## Data Sources
static data set: (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rohanrao/formula-1-world-championship-1950-2020)  
API for additional data pulls:
(https://theoehrly.github.io/Fast-F1/index.html)


<br/>
## References:
<br/>
ESPN. (N.D.). A timeline of Formula One. http://en.espn.co.uk/f1/motorsport/story/3836.html
The Athletic Staff. (N.D.). Formula One viewership: 2022 season sets U.S. record, viewership up 34% among women. theathletic.com. https://theathletic.com/3924843/2022/11/23/formula-1-viewership-2022/
de Artola, A. (N.D.). How Much Does an F1 Car Cost?. fansided.com. https://fansided.com/2022/04/04/f1-car-cost-how-much/
Faulkner, S. (2017). Data Saturation. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118901731.iecrm0060
Steeger, D. (N.D.). Machine learning: How much data do learning methods require?. nordantech.com. https://www.nordantech.com/en/blog/data-science/machine-learning#:~:text=But%20the%20rule%20is%3A%20You,feeling%20for%20the%20data%20structure.

Commit message:

updated README_Jameson to explain the data level aggregations from race to season to career

README_Jameson.md, after:

# Machine Learning with Formula 1 Driver Info Analysis
Using ETL, Unsupervised Machine Learning, and creating a visualization dashboard of data derived from Formula 1 Driver information to explore phenomenas within Formula 1.  

<br/>
<p align="center">Jameson Thornton, Varun Yalaka, John Allen, Maher Abdallah, Jacob Voyce, and Tyrone Fraley<br/>
UC Berkley Extension<br/>
Jan 20, 2023<br/>
<p/>

<br/>
<p align="center">
  <img width="460" height="200" src="Images/formulaonedatapoints.jpeg">
</p>
<br/>

## Project Overview

<br/>
Stretching back as far as 1946, (ESPN, N.D.); Formula One has been a single-seater racing phenomenon, with an average of 1.21 million viewers per race amongst ESPN, ESPN 2, and ABC platforms in 2021, (The Athletic Staff, 2022).Formula One leaves many fans at the edge of their seats. A whole world of viewers from all different countries, ethnical origins, and cultures united in a front to support the racing league and it's competitors. With such high stakes on the line for each driver/team including, but not limited to: technological racing enhancements rooted in prototypes, team sales growth, winning tournaments, and the safety of the drivers and the crew all on the line in an energy packed race to the finish. The average cost of a Formula One vehicle is "20.62 million", according to de Artola (N.D.).
Knowing this, one may ask themselves if data science could possibly answer questions that not only fans have, but the Formula One teams as well. Such questions  as how race outcomes could be predicted when observing the type of tire compounds vs. pit stops to change the tires, positioning on the starting line and how it could affect a driver's potential to win. Other questions regarding technological enhancements and how they contribute to a driver's capability to increase their performance and what it would look like if all drivers were compared against one another even if they have not faced each other? Questions surrounding the phenomenas might be able to be answered within the realms of Unsupervised Machine Learning. Six individuals from different professional backgrounds teamed up to possibly give the first step to answering quetions based by using historical data derived from Kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rohanrao/formula-1-world-championship-1950-2020) by figuring out if drivers could first be clustered using unsupervised learning. The team consists of Jameson Thornton, Varun Yalaka, John Allen, Maher Abdallah, Jacob Voyce, and Tyrone Fraley. The team will be using ETL practices through pandas and SQL to first extract and transform the table, store the tables in a SQL DB and AWS, then using pandas ML libraries through sklearn to develop unsuprvised machine learning models. Finally, the data would be visualized with matplot lib, Tableau, and HTML practices to deploy an interactive dashboard of driver data. 
 
 <br/>
 
## Collaboration and Assignment of Roles

<br/>
Initially, the team met to observe the raw data and draw possible project outlines to better explore, assess, and visualize the phenomenas presented by Formula One data. Understanding that the initial meeting was crucial to develop a project outline/scope of practice, the team created a vision for the project, team expectations, and overall best practices were established to ensure project deadlines and integrity could be viable. During the data exploration phase, fourteen csv files were compiled into a data frame amassing a total of 1554 rows to meet saturation for the machine learning model. According to Faulkner, 2017, "Saturation means that a researcher can be reasonably assured that further data collection would yield similar results and serve to confirm emerging themes and conclusions." Amongst the realms of unsupervised machine learning reaching saturation is important. At times when working with machine learning models, one may start out with 1,000 data points and it may go the right direction; however, at times 1,000,000 data points may not be sufficient for the model (Dr. Steeger, N.D.). To call functions and pull data for the analysis the team agreed on a Formula One API (https://theoehrly.github.io/Fast-F1/index.html). The next step in the collaboration process was to design an outline of the project, time lines, roles, and deliverables. The outline of the project would include ETL, assign databases using PostgreSQL and AWS, develope an unsupervised machine learning model (K-means clustring), and finally create visualizations using Tableau. The team assignments are listed below; however, at times each team member would volunteer to assist in all roles they were not assigned in an effort to meet project deadlines.

* Project Roles:
    * ETL: Jacob Voyce and Jameson Thornton
    * Database: John Allen
    * Unsupervised Machine Learning: Varun Yalaka and Maher Abdhallah
    * Visualization: Tyrone Fraley, Jacob Voyce, and John Allen
    * Project Manager: John Allen
    * Technical Written Report: Tyrone Fraley 

## ETL


some key learnings:
 - having a subject matter expert who can gut check the data is extremely important. Blindly plugging in data into a machine learning model might get results, but they may not make any sense. 
 - joining multiple data tables can cause data loss if some tables are very limited in their shared attributes and using a restrictive join (INNER, or LEFT). 
 - a machine learning clustering model will assign a class to each record/row of data; so in our model if we want to classify drivers, but each driver has many races or laps we may need to aggregate these records into a singular record for each driver where the features represent the results (such as count of wins, or count of finishing positions, etc.)


## Data Aggregations
below are explanations of how the raw lap level data was further aggregated to higher levels of abstractions. Namely the levels were Race, Season (or year), and entire career per driver. 

### Race Level
 this aggregation level was relatively simple since the originating data contained the raw details needed. the step required was simply to create a subset of the features (remove lap times, lap position, and lap number) and drop duplicates from the subsequent dataframe. this works because the other features (from results table for example) are already at a race level aggregation (e.g. they are repeated for every lap in the final merged table). 
### Season Level
 season level is a little more tricky. this does require true aggregation of the underlying race level details derived above. however, it is not quite as simple as a summation, max, count, or even unique count of data features. in some cases there is additional logic to be applied given the way in which the data is represented.

 for season level aggregation achieved by pivot_table in pandas with driver and year as the indices:
  - max of points, wins for each year/driver cominbation
  - sum of laps
 we take a unique count of the results_psotions and quali_position for each driver/year combination
  - take a subset of the dataframe based on driver and year
    - take a value count of each of the results and qualifying positions
    - loop through these and assign each positional value to a new feature columns representing each position (1-25)

### Career Level
This aggegation is actually the simplest; it is essentially a summation of the seasonal data. we take a sum of each column from the season data frame where the driver is the driver of interest. we paste this resulting single row of data into a career level data frame with the driver as the index. 

## Data Sources
static data set: (https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rohanrao/formula-1-world-championship-1950-2020)  
API for additional data pulls:
(https://theoehrly.github.io/Fast-F1/index.html)


<br/>
## References:
<br/>
ESPN. (N.D.). A timeline of Formula One. http://en.espn.co.uk/f1/motorsport/story/3836.html
The Athletic Staff. (N.D.). Formula One viewership: 2022 season sets U.S. record, viewership up 34% among women. theathletic.com. https://theathletic.com/3924843/2022/11/23/formula-1-viewership-2022/
de Artola, A. (N.D.). How Much Does an F1 Car Cost?. fansided.com. https://fansided.com/2022/04/04/f1-car-cost-how-much/
Faulkner, S. (2017). Data Saturation. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118901731.iecrm0060
Steeger, D. (N.D.). Machine learning: How much data do learning methods require?. nordantech.com. https://www.nordantech.com/en/blog/data-science/machine-learning#:~:text=But%20the%20rule%20is%3A%20You,feeling%20for%20the%20data%20structure.
